# Automatic-License-Plate-Recognition

This project focuses on **Automatic License Plate Recognition (ALPR)**, a computer vision task aimed at detecting and recognizing license plates from images or video. The goal of this project is to **explore and analyze each step of the pipeline**, conducting experiments to gain insights into the challenges and different techniques involved. 

An important part of the project consists on the comparison of two distinct deep learning models for the initial step of License Plate Detection: YOLOv8 (an optimized, state-of-the-art object detection framework) and LP-Detector (a publicly available, specialized model for this task). The goal is to analyze the performance of both generalized and specialized approaches before moving on to character segmentation and recognition.

---

### Installation and Setup

#### 1. Environment
This project requires Python 3.x and specific dependencies. We recommend using Conda or a virtual environment.

First, clone the repository:

```bash
git clone [https://github.com/your-username/Automatic-License-Plate-Recognition.git](https://github.com/your-username/Automatic-License-Plate-Recognition.git)
cd Automatic-License-Plate-Recognition
```

The required dependencies are specified in environment.yml. Create and activate the environment:

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate alpr-env
```
---

### Repository Structure

The **key directories** in this repository are the following (corresponding to the different steps followed in our ALPR pipeline):

- `DataExploration/`: Contains the scripts used for analyzing the datasets (e.g., illuminance values and camera angle distribution on images).

- `Detection_YOLO/`: Scripts for object and license plate detection using both YOLOv8 and the public LP-Detector (MKgoud/License-Plate-Detector) model. All together with exploration on the performance of both models and comparison between their results. 

- `CharacterSegmentation/`: Custom scripts and logic for segmenting the detected license plate image into individual characters. Involves correcting distortions on detected license plates, performing character detection using contour- and blob-based methods, as well as applying thresholding and watershed segmentation in order to extract character regions.

- `Descriptors`: This folder contains the scripts used for feature extraction. It includes techniques such as Block Binary Pixel Sum, Histogram of Oriented Gradients, and Local Binary Patterns. We explored how different parameters of these feature descriptors affected their results and applied dimensionality reduction methods to visualize the feature spaces generated by each descriptor. The results of these experiments are available in the `Results` folder.

- `Validation`: Contains the experimental script `BootStrap_Assessment.py`, where we evaluated different binary classifiers (SVC, KNN, and MLP) trained on digit and character data. It includes both metric and statistical analyses.


